ENIAC(Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer) is the crown of the american engineering in 1940’s, which was created for the military purposes, and its not so surprising, because in the middle of WWII US army required artillery firing ballistic tables. Those tables were needed to artillerists for more accurate shooting and took into account many parameters, which affected on the trajectory of the flight for the artillery shell.  If you’re a Civil War historian, no one who was alive at the time can object to what you write. But we get feedback all the time like “That’s not right – and I know because I was there”, or “You didn’t mention XYZ, which I invented.”. And then the representatives of this laboratory contacted Moore’s Electrotechnical school in University of Pennsylvania to count on that the scientists would help them to automatize the work of «Computers». «Computers» that was the name of the clerks, whose mission was to calculate those ballistic tables(i.e. compute). That’s why also ENIAC was called the computer - analogy with hundreds of men who made those computations manually. WWII made a great influence on the development of the informational technology, in particular on the ENIAC, despite the fact that ENIAC was finished and ready for work in 1945. Nevertheless, it was used to calculate ballistic tables, but the most important role ENIAC played in the creation of the more powerful weapon, than the accurate artillery attack - it was used for simulation of the thermonuclear explosion.
When ENIAC appeared, it was the very first digital computer which could calculate two ten-digit numbers in 0,0002 seconds - 50000 times faster than an average human, 20000 times faster than a calculator and 1500 times faster than Mark I, and for specialized purposes, it was even faster. Even though the past doesn’t change, the history of it often does because of new discoveries. For example, historians believed for centuries that the first mechanical calculators, like Blaise Pascal’s Pascaline, were built in the 1600s. If that project did not achieve the required result, the development in this field would slow down for a long period of time. In common cases people build their prototypes, see their mistakes and start their work from the beginning. Because of the war ENIAC’s scientists had to make the machine which will work from the first launch. After rigorous analysis scientists gave preferences to the decimal system instead of binary and separated all system to modules, so it would be easier to operate with introducing and using the data. Each functioning module of the ENIAC was equipped with local program management schemes. Those schemes contained switches, which were used to install the required function, which module could process when it was accessed. When the result was obtained the operation passed to the next module in the operating sequence. The history of software, into which CHM is placing increasing effort, is particularly hard. I’d like to give one example in some detail: the relationship of ENIAC to the origins of software. The process of multiplying two ten digit numbers took 2.6 milliseconds) It was very hard for the scientists to make those modules which contained 840 instruction program that used subroutine, nested loops and indirect addressing for both data locations and jump destinations. ENIAC had almost 18000 electronic lamps which consumed 174 kW, producing 100 kilohertz with amount of memory of 20 number-words and as John Presper Eckert(main constructor of the ENIAC) said, they had in disposition all electronic lamps which provider could give. Developers used 10 types of lamps (technically 4 types were enough, simply their total amount was not sufficient). It was made to reduce the crash probability. Theoretically ENIAC had lots of points of failure (1.8 billion failure options per second), because of which people thought that there is no option of use the machine practically. Eckert solved this problem by simply reducing the voltage served to the lamps(5.7 volts instead of 6.3). Nonetheless ENIAC was breaking not so frequently - one time per 20 hours. It’s not so much by today’s standards but for that time it was enough to make a monthly amount of work of mechanical calculators.
